#self-improvement
#innovation
#problem-solving
#purpose
#focusing
#memory
#time-management
#work
#2022-11

## What Did School Not Teach Me - Reflections Upon Reading a Book

I've selectively read from the book "What School Doesn't Teach You" by Nihit Mohan to write this post.  My focus is on chapters 1, 3, 5 and 8.

Chapter 1 is about sustainable innovation as being built by imagination, intelligence and intent.  It is based on his 3i model of innovation, which emphasises structure, rather than the more commonly known 3i process model as explained here:
https://www.zeratech.com/en/inspire-ideate-implement-the-3i-model/

The 3i process model hides the importance of having a good intellect for good sustainable innovation, as well as the intent, which sets the direction and sustainability of the innovation.  In general, the structural version of the 3i model results in problem resolutions, the formulation of concepts and theories, and procedures, processes, standards and policies.  Nihit emphasises the importance of control over the structural components in order to maximise efforts and resource allocations in the final product, the importance of selective daydreaming to inspire imagination, and the importance of reading more and challenging our own established thinking.  He also advised better use of the smartphone and carving out time for ourselves.

Chapter 3 describes a ladder process for problem resolution.  It consists of 6 steps: figure, faith, focus, force, finish, and fulfill.  The first step figure emphasises the importance of understanding, acknowledging and accepting that there is a problem to be resolved in the first place.  This is where introspection, critical thinking and self-reflection over the 'what' and 'why' of the situation we find ourselves in will play a key role.  Here, Nihit emphasises the exploration of 'what' over 'why' to reduce negativity over the past and draw attention to and better describe the current situation.  The second step faith is basically about having more self confidence and inner faith by listening to our inner spirit, and not just rely on external sources of faith in solving problems, especially when they are in contradiction.

Nihit emphasises that the third step focus is the most important step in this process, because our attention is usually fragmented by physical, sensory and emotional distractions.  He suggested having more control over the technology we use, creating a focus friendly environment, spending time in nature organising our thoughts and tasks, and developing hobbies.  The fourth step force is about taking action or changing our behaviours to resolve problems, and is considered a hard step and physical manifestation and execution of the first 3 soft steps, which only require knowledge and some mentoring and practice.  We must ensure in this step that we have considered all probable and possible solutions, considered our strengths, and seek external validation before taking action.

The fifth step finish is to set up a finish line or metric to reach, which helps to keep the outcomes objective.  We can also create multiple finishing points or milestones in our process, and set them up so that there can be multiple confidence building easier wins first before starting on the difficult milestones.  The sixth step fulfill is simply about celebrating the sense of fulfilment and accomplishment after crossing the finishing lines.  Nihit emphasises that having a purpose and a sense of autonomy drives the desire for self direction and self drivenness to improve for personal mastery over impactful and meaningful things.  It is also important in our satisfying achievements to retain our humility, while wanting to do more and resolve more problems rather than letting them fester and lead to worse outcomes.

Chapter 5 of the book is about time management, and since I've talked extensively about it in my previous posts, I'll just mention that Nihit stresses the importance of building flexibility into our schedules, of avoiding multitasking so that we can focus on one task at a time, of avoiding wasting time so that time can be freed to be wisely used, and of prioritising well.
https://medium.com/@maxloopinmok/are-we-starved-of-time-everyday-what-we-can-do-about-it-f2fc9d75ce5e
https://medium.com/@maxloopinmok/time-management-and-prioritising-based-on-my-current-work-9cf892fac9e2

Chapter 8 returns to a topic mentioned in step 3 of chapter 3: Focus.  Here, Nihit emphasises that focus is not physical, but about clarity of mind and objective.  He mentioned that in a book he read by Jack Canfield, "The Power of Focus", it was mentioned that our profound relationships, goal setting, confidence and mentors all play a significant role in our focus and eventual success in life.  Having healthy and wholesome relationships, and eliminating negative influences will help us progress in our careers in line with our personal goals because of the inherent happiness and positive influences which keep us focused.

Goals are described as the pursuit of worthy objectives until accomplished, and should be definite, clear, concise and realistic to set a proper direction for our efforts.  There are short term goals, which function like the todo lists that are definitely measurable and needed for the regular daily functioning of life, and long term goals, which serve as the guiding lights for our short term goals to avoid short term wins that do not matter in the long run.  Long term goals bring in purpose, drive and eternal happiness for the longer term of several years, but we sometimes hide behind busy short term schedules and avoid them.  Nihit then pointed out that our long term goals have gradually become centred on financial independence and career, and goals for the community, health, family and leisure have become secondary or have been dropped entirely.

Attentional space, as described by Chris Bailey in his book "Hyperfocus", was the next topic mentioned.  It is essentially a combination of our Short Term Memory (STM), which can hold 2 to 6 items in memory, and Working Memory (WM), which processes what's in our STM.  Nihit emphasises that we must manage this small amount of memory space well, or we will continually be distracted.  Optimising this space requires pairing tasks which can be done together, which leads to the development of the right habits or patterns of actions and behaviours.  This is helpful because our familiar habits are stored in our Long Term Memory (LTM), which reduces or eliminates attentional space utilisation, so that we can do or learn more things.  Nihit also mentioned a few more ways to increase attentional space: acknowledge and overcome novelty bias, overcome information overload or attention overwhelm, and manage distractions.  And managing distractions involve a process of identifying patterns in our daily activities, use the most productive time in our day to focus on important or critical activities, and develop hobbies that are aligned to goals.  This process should be revisited from time to time to ascertain goal alignment.

