#self-improvement
#learning
#programming
#2022-12

## Learning to Ultralearn, Principle 3 - Directness

Principle 3 of the book “Ultralearning: Master Hard Skills, Outsmart the Competition, and Accelerate Your Career” is "Directness, Go Straight Ahead".  This principle is exemplified by the example of someone who has just graduated from University and cannot find employment in a job that his education had trained him for.  This person then resorted to joining his industry in lower level positions than he had been educated in, and learnt by work exposure the processes involved and framework of the skills and tools required for the position he was aspiring towards.  He then obtained access to the relevant content and tools, and did self directed or ultralearning to learn the skills, and did an industry level project portfolio example to showcase his learnt skills to the hiring companies.  He then received job offers from more than one company.

Directness is all about doing learning activities with a connection to the context in which the skills learnt are eventually used.  The requirement for having more of the right problem sets to practise is very important, because learning by doing in real situations is where most of the learning takes place.  This does not include difficult learning tasks where the actual work environment can only be simulated due to the infrequentness, difficulty or impossibility of creating the real situation for training and assessment.

Transfer of learning is suppose to happen to graduates from a course after they start working.  However, this does not happen to most people most of the time at significant levels.  Transfer is determined to be paradoxical, because it does happen on many occasions, but usually when we were not in want of it.  A major reason for the lack of transfer is due to our limited learnt knowledge and skill, such that what we have learnt can only be directly applicable within a narrow context.  We do not see the indirect applications outside of that context.  Hence, it is preferable for the training situations to be closer in place and subject matter to the actual situation, so that we do not attempt far transfer.

In addition, direct learning in a real context also allows us to learn the numerous tiny or hidden details and skills that may not be transferred from a classroom setting, but that is more likely to transfer to a real life setting.  It is also important to note that our memory will usually retain stubbornly the initial situations we learnt the skills in, and hence, the lack of transfer.  Essentially, building knowledge outwards from the kernel of a real situation is emphasised.  It must be mentioned that for more complex subjects, there may be no straightforward applications of learning, because even while the learning is direct, the applications are less obvious and less concrete.

Despite the bleak research findings on transfer, we understand that gaining a deeper knowledge of a subject will enable it to be more flexible for future transfer.  We must spend time to work on our learnt structures of knowledge in contexts that are as real as possible for greater learning and eventual mastery.  There are many who have specialised in a smaller subset of fields and they are masters of transfer due to their depth of knowledge.

The book concludes the Principle 3 with 4 tactics that exploit directness of learning.  There is also a final warning on transfer.  Tactic 1 is project based learning, because when we organise our learning around producing something, we're guaranteed to at least learn how to produce that thing.  My current actions exemplify that, because in choosing to blog what I learn, I produce writings that I can reflect on in future and improve on, or possibly adapt into flashcards for better retention.  Tactic 2 is immersive learning, where we surround ourselves with the practise environment for the skill we are learning, thereby enabling more practice than usual in a fuller range of situations.  In blogging, I'm mostly immersing myself with topics focusing on self-discovery and self-improvement in terms of time spent.  Due to the nature of the topics of learning and programming, blogging also helps with their learning, but ultimately, it also requires the actual practice.  For learning programming, that requires actually creating, testing and updating code, and ensuring clean code.

Tactic 3 is the flight simulator method, which is for learning that cannot be direct for legality reasons, such as piloting a plane or performing surgeries, and the learner cannot be tested in the actual situation until considerable training time has been invested.  A simulation of the actual environment that remains faithful to the cognitive elements of the task in question, will have to be created for learning purposes.  Tactic 4 is the overkill approach, where we challenge ourselves by setting a difficult learning goal, such that what we have to learn is wholly contained in the goal.  Due to the extremely high demands of this approach, we are unlikely to miss any important lessons or feedback.  The book suggests that Tactic 4 should be continued over the longer term after the likely initial shock that is overcome by our motivation to start, but given the likely higher stress of learning, I would recommend keeping close tabs on our mental health when we undertake this course of learning.

Finally, there is a warning I abide by when I learn new subjects such as new programming languages.  We have to ask ourselves where and how the knowledge will manifest itself.  If that can be answered, we must ask ourselves how we'll tie our learning to that context.  This situation happened to me when I learnt the new functional programming language Haskell.  Due to its difficulty, its initial lack of quantity of good learning resources in 2020, and lack of jobs requiring that skill, it was very difficult for me to determine how what I've learnt in my current work will transfer to other settings when I first started learning Haskell.  It was by faith that I kept on learning, but the learning stagnated after one year and I was assigned other tasks.  Now, things have improved on all counts and I'm ready to get back to relearning Haskell.

