#self-improvement
#learning 
#memory
#2022-12

## Learning to Ultralearn, Principle 7 - Retention

Principle 7 of the book “Ultralearning: Master Hard Skills, Outsmart the Competition, and Accelerate Your Career” is "Retention: Don’t Fill a Leaky Bucket".  

People who do exceptionally well at memory tasks may be obsessive or dedicated learners.  We can emulate them with active memory practice, where we actively recall and rehearse what we learn.  Memory is an essential part of understanding, intuition, and performing practical skills, because these are useless if we can't recall them.  Knowledge fades with time due to the forgetting curve, which illustrates an exponential decay in knowledge that is steepest right after learning.  There are 3 dominant theories to explain this.  

The first theory of forgetting is that memories just decay with time.  However, this is an incomplete explanation because we have memories of our childhood, and we remember vivid or meaningful things more easily.  These show that memories can transcend time.  The second theory of forgetting is that of interference in memories, which happens when there are multiple ways to perform a particular skill, or multiple meanings to a word.  There is proactive interference, where new learning is harder due to previous knowledge.  There is also the reverse retroactive interference, where new learning erases or suppresses previous knowledge.  The third theory of forgetting is forgotten cues, where our memories become inaccessible instead of being forgotten.  This is because we cannot experience all of our Long Term Memory (LTM) simultaneously.  We pull information from LTM based on sequential cues or links in a chain of information retrieval.  Information becomes inaccessible when decay or interference damages one or more of these links.  Hence, relearning information, which involves memory repair work, is likely to be faster than the original learning, which requires construction of new memories.  In remembering or recalling information, we are engaging in the creative reconstruction of knowledge, which modifies our memories and may result in vivid but untrue recollections.  

There are different ways to remember information.  When there is a large quantity of information to remember, Spaced Repetition Systems (SRS) will be helpful.  If we are fine with some forgetfulness, relearning through regular practices will work as well.  The first method to remember information with is spaced repetitions, where we must not cram learning.  Learning of the same content is repeated at regular intervals, and possibly interleaved with the learning of other content so that more can be learnt in a shorter period of time.  For this method, a balance must be found between intervals that are too short to effectively test our information recall, and intervals that are too long and we have forgotten much of the information we are trying to remember.  SRS or flash card software are implementations of this method, and are generally used to remember facts by posing questions that have one definite answer.  It is more difficult to apply to more complicated domains of knowledge that depend on complex information associations which are best learnt through real world practice.  Spaced repetitions do not always require software, and can be just simple repetitive reading or rehearsing, which are also effective.  Semi regular practices of a skill is also effective.  We do spaced repetitions not to achieve perfect memory, but to recall effectively, which is good enough.  We can apply this method for more elaborate skills by semi regularly doing refresher projects involving those skills.  This applies for most programming skills.  

The second method to remember information is proceduralisation, where convert declarative knowledge that are more easily forgotten, into procedural skills that are retained much longer.  One dominant theory of learning suggests that most skills starts as declarative knowledge that becomes procedural with practice.  These durable procedural knowledge are encoded in our motor movements.  Based on this method, instead of learning a large volume of skills or knowledge evenly, we can emphasise the learning of a core set of information more frequently for proceduralisation.  This can be done when in the learning of mathematical or programming skills, where we make a conscious decision to automate or proceduralise the most essential skills.  Most skills we learn are incompletely proceduralised, so we need to actively search our minds while performing the skills.  This happens because some skills cannot be completely automated and always require some conscious thinking.  Hence, some of our memories will be retained, while some will be forgotten over longer periods of time.  One solution for this problem is to ensure that a certain amount of knowledge is completely proceduralised before concluding practice.  Another solution will be to put in more effort to proceduralise the skills that will serve as cues and access points to other knowledge.  These strategies are quite speculative, but can be applied to more effectively learn a new programming language, where we completely proceduralise the process for a programming project involving that language.  This will get us over the initial difficulty of writing a new program.  

The third method of remembering information is overlearning, where additional practice, beyond what is needed for adequate performance, increases the duration of memory storage.  This involves the initial learning phase, where learners starts new and practise until they can perform the task or skill correctly once, followed by the overlearning phase, where practice continues.  When overlearning, there are no improvements to the skill, but the durability of the skill in the learners' minds will be extended.  The typical increase in memory duration due to overlearning is quite short, so it is useful only for skills like first aid or emergency response protocols that are rarely practised but need to be remembered well between practice sessions.  This can also be applied to the learning of mathematical and programming skills.  Overlearning can be combined with spaced repetitions and proceduralisation to develop memories that can last much longer.  

Overlearning fits well with Principle 3 direct learning because the direct use of skills frequently requires overpractising certain core abilities that are central to practical applications.  This can be contrasted with academic learning, where practice is distributed more evenly over the entire curriculum, so that minimum capabilities are achieved in all areas.  There are 2 main methods of overlearning.  Firstly, there is core practice, where the core elements of a skill are continually practised and refined.  This method pairs well with immersion techniques, or working on extensive (not intensive) projects after doing the initial learning.  Here, the shift from learning to doing should not be dismissed as just mere applications of previously learnt knowledge.  Secondly, there's advanced practice, where the core parts of lower level skills are overlearnt by applying them in more difficult domains.  When skills are applied at higher and more difficult levels, the overlearnt lower level skill retains better.  

The final method of remembering information are mnemonics strategies.  What these strategies have in common is their hyperspecificity, which means that they are designed to remember very specific patterns of information.  They also usually involve translating abstract or arbitrary information into vivid pictures or spatial maps.  The process is quite complicated and elaborate at first, but it helps convert a difficult association into a few links that are much easier to associate and remember.  There are mnemonics for keywords, lists, numbers, maps, or sequences of steps in a procedure.  There are 2 disadvantages in using mnemonics.  Firstly, it requires a significant initial effort to learn, which is not viable in current times due to the existence of external memory tools such as paper and computers.  In addition, recalling from mnemonics is generally not as automatic as just remembering something, because it is too slow to permit fluency with our memories.  Mnemonics can bridge difficult to remember information that may be highly dense information in a very specific format or simply be dense initial information that has to be acquired, but they should not be the final step in creating lasting memories.  
