#self-improvement
#learning 
#feedback
#social-media
#2022-12

## Learning to Ultralearn, Principle 6 - Feedback

Principle 6 of the book “Ultralearning: Master Hard Skills, Outsmart the Competition, and Accelerate Your Career” is "Feedback: Don’t Dodge the Punches".  

If we can get information, even intuitively, about whether we are doing right or wrong, we'll be able to learn faster.  There are non constructive feedback, such as attacks on the learner's ego, and constructive feedback that includes useful information.  When we receive feedback, whether positive or negative, we should not overreact to it.  Feedback that have a negative impact on our motivation should be ignored or handled properly.  We should take in feedback that is just right for our current stage of learning.  Although feedback can be uncomfortable, we should not fear it.  We can get faster results from self-directed learning if we are self-confident, resolute, and persistent in getting aggressive feedback.  

There are generally 3 types of feedback.  Outcome feedback is a broad scale feedback that does not provide much information, and just shows whether we may be on the right path.  If there are people reading my blog posts, this shows that my posts are worth reading for some people, and I'm on the right path.  Hence, outcome feedback can provide us with a motivation benchmark against our goal, and we can use it to check the relative merits of different learning methods or approaches, such as through different ways of blogging.  

Informational feedback shows what we are doing wrong, but may not tell us how to fix the error.  This usually happens when I do programming, because most error messages do not directly tell us what is the change that has to be made when there is an error.  As we try different ways to resolve the problem, more errors may show up, and as a whole, all the errors can provide an overall feedback that may be more effective than the feedback from one single error.  

Corrective feedback is the third type of feedback and provides a specific answer to our problem.  This usually happens when we do assignments and are able to check our answers against the solutions provided.  This also coincides with the 5 retrieval methods using the prompt-response / question-answer framework described in Principle 5.  When I encounter a difficult problem while programming, I sometimes post my problem publicly on social media to get feedback from others who may have more expertise.  If the answer resolves the problem I have, then it is corrective feedback.  Hence, self directed learning is not necessarily solitary learning.  There is a variety of content on the Internet that can provide either informational or corrective feedback for us, just by our seeking them.  This usually provides a relatively smooth error resolution experience when I do most of my programming work.  

In most cases, we should not upgrade feedback from a weaker to a stronger form, such as outcome to informational, or informational to corrective.  However, in many cases, in order to determine the form of feedback, we may have to test the answers provided by the feedback itself.  This usually happens when I post my programming problems on social media, where the comments or answers suggested may or may not directly resolve the problem.  Although immediate feedback increases the speed of learning due to quicker recognition of mistakes, more effective learning happens when there is a delay in getting feedback, just as retrievals from our memory should be spaced or delayed after we first read the content.  These delays allow us to struggle with our problems and improve our overall learning.  

In addition, to improve the feedback we get, when we seek feedback, we should first frame our problem properly and filter out the noise, so that the essence of our problem can be conveyed.  We should also filter the noise from the feedback and just frame the essence of the feedback.  Next, we should adjust the difficulty of our problem.  This usually happens to me when I program.  A problem that seems too difficult may be slowly decomposed into its constituents that may be easier to get feedback on and resolve.  And when I read an example in a book, I may think up more complicated versions of the example, and I may get feedback on how to solve that complication.  

The third way to improve our feedback is to consider metafeedback, which is feedback on our overall learning.  I usually keep track of how many blog posts I've made a month to gauge my learning rate, just as I can assess the frequency of my GitHub updates to know my programming rate.  For my blogs, I also tagged them, so that I'll know my focus and direction in terms of topics learnt.  Finally, we can improve our learning by getting high intensity and rapid feedback.  In programming, this usually happens when I do my programming with someone else, so feedback is continuous.  In this type of short-term feedback, we must be able to strip away the emotional noise to reveal the valuable signals in the feedback.  
