#self-improvement
#self-discovery 
#learning 
#focusing 
#attention 
#2022-12

## Learning to Ultralearn, Principle 2 - Focus

Principle 2 of the book “Ultralearning: Master Hard Skills, Outsmart the Competition, and Accelerate Your Career” is "Focus: Sharpen Your Knife".  A blog post on the topic of attention, which is related to the topic discussed here, is "Self Evaluation based on the 4th Power - The Power Of Attention And Routines".  It can be found here:

https://medium.com/@maxloopinmok/self-evaluation-based-on-the-4th-power-the-power-of-attention-and-routines-d119ef38555f

The ability to focus well will allow us to learn deeply, so Principle 2 lays out 3 of our problems in focusing when we learn and the solutions for each problem.  The first problem is procrastination, or failure to start focusing, which arises due to a desire that drives us to do something else, or a reluctance or an aversion to the learning tasks required, or both.  The first step to overcome procrastination is to be aware and recognise it, because procrastination is usually unconscious.  The next steps would be to apply crutches to support our learning behaviour.  A good first crutch is to recognise that our desire, reluctance or aversion is only temporary, so we may set a simple goal and tell ourselves to spend just 5 minutes on the learning task before taking a break.  After applying the 5-minute rule several times successfully, we can try to apply the more demanding Pomodoro Technique to be more productive.  This involves 25 minutes of focus followed by a 5 minute break.  After successfully trying the Pomodoro Technique several times, we can start to schedule chunked periods of time on our calendar for focused learning projects to build up a conscious habit.  We should try to find an intrinsic interest in what we are learning, so that we can maintain our focus for long periods without pressure.  It is important not to attempt a difficult goal as our first crutch, because we'll only become demotivated by the effort.  

The second problem is that we get distracted, or fail to sustain focus.  It has been said that the best focus to sustain is flow, which is a state of mind where we stop being interrupted by distracting thoughts and are completely absorbed in the task at hand.  This is a model for ideal focus, and is the enjoyable state between boredom and frustration, when a task is neither too easy nor too difficult.  Such a state of mind would not be common during deliberate practices, because such practices demand monitoring of explicit goals, feedback, and opportunities for error correction.  The self-consciousness present in difficult learning situations, where we have to consciously adjust our approaches, usually makes flow impossible, but where learning is not too difficult, flow may be likely.  The resistance to what is natural benefits learning, but obstructs flow.  Flow will occur more during domain-related activities where we are just applying the already learnt skill.  Working on a programming problem at the limit of my abilities, requiring seek-scan-assimilate-deep dive attention modes, is where flow is obstructed.  This bottleneck is only cleared once mental connections are made to form a solution creatively.  

The duration of focus should be shorter, where practice is broken into different study periods to avoid cramming information.  It is also beneficial to interleave or alternate between different aspects of the skill or knowledge to be remembered, even within the same block of focus or study period.  However, while it is beneficial to split up practice into a few blocks of focus, this splitting into multiple smaller blocks must not be overdone or it will fracture our focus productivity.  A block of 50 minutes to an hour with several minutes of break time at the end would be a good duration, but ultimately, we'll have to find an optimal balance for the purpose of retention based on our schedule, personality and work flow.  

There are 3 sources of distraction.  Firstly, we may be distracted by our environment because we attempted to multitask, such as listening to music while working or learning.  To overcome this distraction, we have to be aware of the environment we work best in, and we should test our preferences for productivity.  In general, multitasking is bad for ultralearning.  Secondly, we may be distracted by our task or learning activity.  Hence, we have to choose the learning tool that we find easier to focus on.  However, we should do this without compromising on directness (Principle 3) or on feedback (Principle 6), because our overall learning effectiveness would be reduced.  In general, this should not happen because both directness and feedback should improve focus and concentration.  For me, learning through reading printed content is more effective than watching videos although listening and watching is relatively easier, because I have to take an effort to highlight many key sentences on paper, and then after that, summarise what I've read by writing / typing.  While all these take more time, I'm less likely to be distracted by my environment, my task, or my mind, which is the third source of distraction.  This distraction occurs due to negative emotions, restlessness, or daydreaming.  This can be resolved by being aware or mindful of the problems in our lives, which we may have to resolve first, or of the thoughts or feelings that occur randomly in our minds, which we may note down in acknowledgement if they are relevant or important, or we may simply just be aware of them, before adjusting our focus gently back to our learning task.  We should not abandon our task entirely to look deeply into random thoughts, unless they are too important to put aside.  This requires good decision making skills based on good mental models in our minds.  

The third problem occurs when we fail to create the right type of focus.  This depends on our general arousal and the complexity of the learning task.  General arousal is our overall feeling of energy or alertness, which is reduced when we are sleepy.  Although arousal influences attention, the keen alertness created by high arousal leads to brittle focus, because the range of focus becomes narrowed.  Hence, drinking some coffee, which increases arousal, would be good for focusing on relatively simple tasks or tasks that require intense concentration towards a small target.  However, too much coffee leads to too much arousal, which will impair our focus because we become jittery and easily distracted.  

Performing more complex tasks, such as solving a programming problem, usually requires a more relaxed kind of focus, where the space of focus is larger and more diffused, requires more mental quietness.  This allows us to consider many different inputs or ideas to solve the problem.  When doing a task very creatively, we may need to have no focus at all in order for creativity to flow if we get stuck.  When we take breaks from the task, the space of focus may widen even more, such that possibilities that were not in our consciousness previously conjoin and we make new discoveries.  This is a scientific explanation for the intuition occurring during leisure or while falling asleep, instead of while working.  However, for intuition to emerge from our rest periods, we must have taken much effort to focus on a problem during our study or work periods, such that residues of the problem and its ideas stay in our minds.  

