#self-improvement
#learning
#memory
#2022-12 

Learning to Ultralearn, Principle 5 - Retrieval

Principle 5 of the book “Ultralearning: Master Hard Skills, Outsmart the Competition, and Accelerate Your Career” is "Retrieval: Test to Learn".  

When we have limited time to study a subject, after reading the contents, the best tactic will be to self test and freely recall what we have read.  This tactic is better than reviewing the contents again, or creating a concept map for the contents.  Self testing works better may be due to the feedback from the answers in tests, but even without the feedback, free recall or the act of trying to summon up knowledge from memory is a powerful learning task by itself, beyond its connection to direct practice or feedback.  When we are forced to invent or create our own solutions to our problems without answers being provided, we are also forced to retrieve information from our own minds.  Learning becomes very effective.  

The reason why we don't realise that we can learn better by freely recalling, is that we do not know how to know with certainty how well we've learnt something.  When we rely on clues from our experience of studying to make judgements of learning (JOLs), we are only making judgements based on our feelings that we have studied or processed something easily and smoothly, and we believe those judgements.  To ascertain this, we need to test our memories.  More difficult retrievals lead to better learning if the act of retrieving from memory is successful.  Free recall tests, where we need to recall as much as we can without prompting, are better than cued recall tests, where we are given hints about what to remember.  And cued recall tests are better than recognition tests, such as multiple choice questions, where we only need to recognise and not generate the answers.  

Retention is improved if there is a slight delay that is long enough for answers to not be in the mind and has to be generated, between reading and recalling.  This difficulty may be part of the reason when retrieval works, but it should be so difficult that retrieval becomes impossible.  This will happen if the delay becomes too long and we've forgotten everything, so we must try to find a right midpoint for delay, where it's not too long, nor too short.  Giving ourselves less clues and prompts will also improve retention, if we can get some feedback on our answers.  Hence, test taking is not just an evaluation of knowledge, but also an increased source of learning.  The conventional idea of knowledge being first acquired, then strengthened or tested later, still applies.  In fact, retrieval may even prepare us to learn better in future through the forward testing effect, where regular testing of previously studied information makes it easier to learn new information.  This benefit is likely due to our minds creating paths to new information that has yet to exist, possibly through our attention, such that when we encounter new questions, our mind automatically adjusts its attentional resources to spot likely solutions that we discover later.  Thus, retrieval must be practised even before we know how to answer correctly.  

Retrieval takes less time than review to learn, but not learning the content is much faster.  Hence, we must determine the relevance of what we are trying to learn, and only practise retrieving needed information, because nobody has time to master everything.  For content we can't retrieve, we will have to be contented with knowing how to search for the answers when we need them.  This strategy of not learning until needed is applied in Principle 3 direct learning, where we are forced to retrieve only the content needed for the skill we are learning.  This means that only information that is most needed in terms of frequency of need, is learnt.  Content that are not important or easily found are left to be searched for when less frequently needed.  The problem with this strategy is that if we do not have enough knowledge stored in our minds to recognise the answer to our question, our searches will not lead to the right answers.  It fails to encourage enough retrieval by omitting knowledge that can help solve a problem but is not necessary to learn.  Hence, we should still have a certain amount of passive exposure to different information, which will benefit from retrieval practices.  

Principle 5 concludes with 5 retrieval practices / tactics.  In my view, they are all closely related to each other in a prompt-response / question-answer framework.  Tactic 1 is the use of flash cards, pairing associations between questions and answers.  More specifically, they pair a specific cue to a specific response, both of which are clear and possibly relatively short to express.  Although simple and effective, their effectiveness is reduced when the situation for remembering information becomes highly variable, such that the concepts don't fit the cue-response framework.  

Tactic 2 is free recall, where a section of content is read or listened to, which forms a generalised prompt / question, and then followed by writing or typing down everything we can remember, which is the response / answer.  This tactic is difficult, but this is also the reason for its effectiveness.  Tactic 3 is the question book method, where we take notes by rephrasing what we've recorded as questions to be answered later, with a reference to where to find the answer in case we forget.  One possible problem of this approach is that we may literally transcribe all content details into questions, including the minor or irrelevant details.  Hence, we must try to think deeply and just restate the big idea or main point of a section or chapter into a question.  

Tactic 4 is self generated challenges, where the answers / retrieved information are not just facts or summaries, but variable solutions to problems that are the questions.  These solutions are examples of the technique that builds / generates / creates the solutions.  The problems / challenges are created as we read the passive content.  Tactic 5 is closed book learning, which is an extensive form of free recall, whereby any practice, whether direct or a drill, is cut off from the ability to look for answers from the source.  This is exemplified by the creation of a concept map from memory without looking at the book.  

