#self-improvement
#learning
#blogging
#2022-12

Learning to Ultralearn, Principle 4 - Drill

The rate determining step in our learning process is the bottleneck formed by certain aspects of our learning problem that controls the speed at which we can become more proficient in learning as a whole.  We have to carefully analyse the existing learning process to identify this step and isolate it, so that we can work on it to improve it with deliberate practices called drills.  Drills are so effective that even if there isn't one isolatable aspect of the skill that is reducing our performance, we can still apply them.  

A learning trap is formed when our cognitive resources (attention, memory, effort, etc) have to be spread over many different aspects of the skill, such that if we devote our attention to improving just one aspect, our performance on the other aspects will all worsen.  We can partly resolve this problem by using drills that can target a skill that is sufficiently simplified so that one aspect can be addressed.  

A contradiction exist here, because Principle 3 Direct learning involves working on a whole skill nearest the situation where it will be used.  A drill will take the direct practice and cut it apart to focus practice on an isolated component.  This contradiction is resolved using the Direct-Then-Drill (DTD) approach.  The first step is to practise directly to connect to and get feedback from applying the skill so that transfer occurs.  Then, we would analyse the direct skill, and try to isolate rate determining steps in our performance or subskills that are difficult to improve due to an inability to focus caused by too many concurrent activities in the skill.  Then, we would apply drills on these components separately to improve.  Finally, we go back to direct practice and integrate the components.  This integration practice will bridge transfers between the isolated steps and subskills, and the more complex whole context.  It will also test and determine the effectiveness of the drill in terms of design and suitability.  This feedback will ensure that we do not waste time on drills that do not improve learning effectively by tackling what's really difficult in actual practice.  

The earlier we are in the learning process, the faster the DTD cycle should be, even if it's within one learning session.  As we get better with our skills, more learning effort is required to noticeably improve our overall performance.  This makes longer detours into drills more acceptable.  As we approach mastery, we may have to focus mainly on drills because our knowledge of our complex skill will have become more refined and accurate, and improving any individual component of the skill will have become more difficult.  I can directly apply the DTD learning cycle to my blogs of learning skills and learning programming.  I have achieved the first step of making notes in my blogs to improve my comprehension.  However, my overall learning is limited because I can't recall what I've learnt well.  There are 2 rate determining steps: establishing a proper framework for the concepts, and then memorising the framework.  I will attempt both after blogging about Principle 5 Retrieval, Principle 6 Feedback, and Principle 7 Retention.  

Before designing tactics for drills, the first difficulty will be to determine when and what to drill.  These components are the rate determining steps and the subskills involving concurrent activities.  This analysis can be done through experimentation, where we first test a possible component that may be causing difficulty with drills using the DTD approach, then quickly assess and get feedback about whether we got it right.  The second difficulty is to design a drill that can improve performance, because even if we know when and what to drill, it may be difficult to drill that component without artificially removing what makes it difficult in actual practice.  The last difficulty is that drills are hard and uncomfortable to do.  They require us learners to not only think deeply about what is being learnt, but also identify the most difficult parts and attack the weakness directly rather than persist in the comfort of what we have mastered, so we must be strongly motivated to aggressively learn them.  

The first drill tactic is time slicing, where a section in time from a longer sequence of actions of the skill that is more difficult or important, is isolated and drilled.  This involves obsessive repetitious practices of the skill from that moment in time.  

The second drill tactic is cognitive components, where different cognitive aspects of the skill which are usually managed simultaneously, are isolated and drilled.  An example would be the isolation of grammar from pronunciation and vocabulary while learning a language.  

The third drill tactic is copycat, where we copy the parts of the skill we do not want to drill from other works or our previous works, and then focusing exclusively on doing the part of the skill we want to practise on.  This saves a lot of time because we only drill that part of the skill, and reduces the cognitive burden of repeatedly doing all parts of the skill.  

The fourth drill tactic is the magnifying glass method.  This is used when we cannot isolate the difficult part of the skill for drill practice.  This method advocates spending more time and cognitive resources on doing that difficult part of the skill while also completing other parts of the skill normally.  This may help intuit and develop new habits and subskills while slowly doing that difficult part.  

The fifth drill tactic is prerequisite chaining, where we try to do a skill that we do not have all the prerequisites for.  After performing poorly, we assess our performance, and then identify and learn a foundation skill that is a prerequisite for the whole skill, and then do the skill again.  This process is repeated by identifying and learning more foundation skills after each skill trial.  This is a do, assess, identify, learn, do cyclical process.  This tactic focuses learning on only the necessary prerequisite subskills, and so saves on time spent learning irrelevant subskills.  

Principle 4 concludes by emphasising the need to do mindful drilling, where we only spend time on drills for skills or learnings that we will use, or know the reasons for our practices or how they fit into the broader context.  Drilling without context is mind numbing.  We must drill knowing the purpose, so that the drills can be better designed, and elicit creativity and imagination as we strive to solve complex learning challenges.  