#self-improvement
#learning 
#experimentation
#testing
#2022-12

## Learning to Ultralearn, Principle 9 - Experimentation

Starting our learning with metalearning helps us understand how our subject of learning breaks down into different elements, and see how others have learnt it previously, thereby giving us good starting points for our learning process.  However, as our skills develop, there will be fewer examples for us to follow, and we will have to rely more on experimentation and finding our own path.  Our set of learnt skills becomes more unique and improving them becomes an increasingly personalised and idiosyncratic adventure.  In addition, our abilities may become stagnated or outdated after we have learnt the basics.  When we start learning, it is about accumulating new facts, knowledge and skills to solve problems we could not solve before.  After learning to solve the problems, we must then improve our skills by unlearning stale or ineffective approaches to solving our problems or try to solve more difficult problems.  Hence, experimentation becomes synonymous with learning, and as we approach mastery, our skills will not just become proficient, but also original.  Creativity becomes valuable.  

The book suggests 3 types of experimentation.  The first type is when we experiment with our learning resources - the materials and methods used for learning.  This experimentation must be matched with a drive to do the necessary work.  In my case, learning about flash cards being helpful for my memory led me to create an online version of this tool.  However, I have yet to test it because I have yet to include much content in the flash cards to test myself.  However, this is an example of an application of the Feynman's Technique described in Principle 8, where we provide illustrative examples of our learning.  Here, I'm writing about how I learnt to learn, and blogging truly helps me learn.  This is my evaluation of how well my learning went and it makes sense to continue with it.  However, I believe I'll need to create the flash cards as my SRS, and test myself regularly to solidify my memory of it.  

The second type of experimentation is about the technique, where we decide what to learn next.  This is because the options for learning multiply after we have learnt more.  In this case, we will just have to experiment on learning the different topics or sub-topics associated with what we are learning as our main topic and evaluate our progress.  The third type of experimentation is about the style of our skill, where we are able to apply our preferences which will have a unique combination of strengths and weaknesses.  Here, we may want to emulate the styles of the masters in our field, or just try to integrate aspects of their styles into our preferences.  In all 3 types of experimentation, there is a need to concentrate our efforts on a single approach after exploring multiple approaches, and then assessing our proficiency, although in my case, I would currently hesitate to judge my own level of proficiency in what I'm learning.  I can, however, express my confidence that I'm learning well.  

The book then suggests that the mindset of experimentation is akin to a growth mindset, where learners see their own capacity for learning as something that can be actively improved.  Both mindsets are relatively self-fulfilling, because when we expect to improve our learning through experimentation, we will get improved learnings as our outcomes in most cases.  The book then suggests that while the growth mindset encourages us to see opportunities and potential for improvement, experimentation enacts a plan to reach those improvements.  This is because the experimental mindset does not just assume growth, but creates an active strategy for exploring all possible ways to reach it.  Hence, we must not just believe that our skills can be improved, but that there are many possible ways to improve.  We must not be dogmatic in our thinking.  

To succeed in our experimentation, we should understand the learning problems we are facing.  There are a few suggested tactics upon understanding our problem.  Tactic 1 is to copy and then create.  Copying provides a starting point for making decisions to resolve our problem if there are too many possibilities available.  We must understand that when we emulate, we are only using that as the starting point for our further development in our creative direction.  Besides simplifying the choices for us, we must also deconstruct the example we are copying.  This can often highlight non-obvious strengths and weaknesses in the solution we are copying, and reveal truths behind that solution.  

Tactic 2 is more scientific and is about comparing methods side by side, where we test 2 different solutions on a problem, and then varying the problem by a single condition.  This way, we can see the impact of that condition, as well as determine which method is the better solution, and which is our preferred style.  Trying out 2 approaches also increases the breadth of our expertise and encourages experimentation outside of our comfort zone.  Tactic 3 is about introducing new constraints, and is used when we are familiar with our routine solution.  New constraints that render our habitual routines obsolete in many ways, will force us to develop new capabilities.  This tactic is suggested to be an axiom of design, where the best innovations come from working within constraints, where constraints are created specifically for the exploration of options less familiar to us and will sharpen our underlying skills.  

Tactic 4 is about avoiding the common path of skill perfectionism, and being good in a hybrid set of unrelated skills.  This may be a more accessible learning path for us if we do not choose to be perfect in our one approach.  In my case, I hope to learn multiple web development and programming languages both from the front and back ends, which are relatively related skills.  I'm currently branching their application into symbolic artificial intelligence, but I hope to learn more aspects of AI as I continue.  These will be more unrelated to web development.  

Tactic 5 is to explore the extremes of the skills we are learning.  This is an approach I was forced into when I learnt Haskell, because it is a functional programming language which is very different from the traditional object oriented or imperative programming languages of JavaScript, Python or C where I come from.  Hence, almost everything I have learnt in Haskell is extreme in their quality, and hence, the requirement of different tools to run and deploy Haskell, and a new mindset for learning the language.  However, I am admittedly not even close to the extremes of the Haskell programming language.  I have also been forced to learn more about JavaScript and Python in my work, and it is here that I'm nearer the extremes of both languages.  

Learning is a process of experimentation because when we practise directly, get feedback, and actively recall information, we are adjusting the knowledge and skills in out head to fit the real world.  Moreover, trying out different learning methods is also an act of experimentation in the determination of trade-offs, such as those between direct learning and drills, and between retention and intuition.  To learn beyond our current habits, we may attempt to copy exemplars, run tests, or push to extremes.  We may focus on associations and connections when learning, or we may make practice the foundation.  