#self-improvement
#synthesis
#creativity
#mental-models
#decision-making
#2022-12

## Self Evaluation based on the 5th Power - The Power Of Synthesis

I'm doing this self evaluation of the 5th power, the power of synthesis based on the book "Thriving on Overload: the 5 Powers for Success in a World of Exponential Information".  This is more of a summary to self improve, and I also had some help from:

https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-introtocollegereadingandwriting/chapter/reading-writing-to-synthesize/

In order to synthesise, we must first analyse the content.  This means that the content will have to be broken down into its parts to evaluate the content and see how they work together.  It is rational and reductionist.  A summary of the content could be created from that.  After analysis, we will have to synthesise by perceiving the whole, where we search for thoughts or insights about a topic of focus based on our analysis.  These thoughts may support the content, or be contradictory to the content.  Then we'll have to decide on whether we support, are against or are neutral to these thoughts to conclude our synthesis.

Synthesis is becoming the key to value creation because of the increasing complexity of life and work.  It is now much harder to bring different thoughts and opinions into harmony with each other.  There are benefits in improving our synthesising capabilites.  The first benefit is that we can make sense of our life and work when we understand the nature of the world and our expertise.  We can also acquire true expertise in what we do after spending years in what we do and gradually learning to perceive the whole.  We can eventually make better and more complex decisions when we are able to comprehend more factors that are not unknowable.  As the pace of change increases, we will be able to perceive and assess more opportunities and their underlying variables and uncertainties.  By being able to synthesise information from different fields to generate understanding, new perspectives and better decisions, machines will not be able to replace us yet.

In essence, synthesis is about creating mental models: representations in our minds about how the world works.  It also describes how we think because all our behaviours and decisions are based on expectations arising from these models.  This will surpass just using simple, reducible rules of thumb to assist our thinking, but the complexity will increase.

The book presents a mental model that supports our ability to excel at synthesis. The model is a tiered fountain that starts with the base tier of openness to ideas.  The second tier is creative connections.  The third tier is integrative thinking.  The fourth tier is richer mental models, followed by the top tier of states of mind for insight.

Openness to ideas originates from one of the OCEAN "Big Five" personality traits: Openness to experience.  It was reframed as openess to new information, where our ability to adapt by noticing the world has changed.  This changed our outlook, opinions and actions.  Essentially, our personality can be changed to better adapt to our environment.  An effective way is to simply enact an attitude of being more open for its benefits.  We must, however, remain credulous and understand that we may become too open.  An example would be an over-recognition of patterns in life, such that these patterns, possibilities or ideas are not founded in reality.  Hence, we must be judicious in being open to and accepting new ideas.

The second tier of creative connections is about synthesis being creative and creativity entailing synthesis.  This is because perceiving obscure links between disparate ideas, thereby resulting in framing of ideas that is discussed as the 2nd power, is a deeply creative act.  Psychological distance leads to breadth of thought, such that thinking about far away places or the distant future leads to big picture thinking and discernment about what's important.  Grappling with highly diverse concepts through the use of decks of cards also promote synthesis of divergent thinking, sometimes leading to breakthrough ideas.  In this way, divergent and unpredictable thinking can be conditioned into a routine or habit.

The second tier's creativity and the third tier's integrative thinking has been proposed by the book to provide a solution to the complex problems of our times.  It's about integrating contradictions, paradoxes and polarities.  Paradoxical frames can have positive influences on creativity, such as increased exploration, sensitivity to unusual associations, and the generation of new associations, such that outcomes that possess seemingly contradictory qualities could be produced.  An example is the production of a good that is both cheaper and yet of higher quality.  The book's name "Thriving on Overload" has been postulated as a paradox itself, but the recommendation is for us to have an attitude that all worthy ideas should be integrated, whether they appear to confirm or contradict our knowledge.

The attempts to integrate thinking and paradoxes lead to the fourth tier's richer mental models.  Ultimately, all mental models are wrong, but they should be useful within the context, such as in integrating paradoxes.  Due to the constantly changing world, our imperfect mental models must evolve and be regularly updated to include more or more diverse elements, while retaining the value of what we have learnt in our lifetime of experience.  There is an emphasis to apply the thinking processes in the scientific revolutions to our personal mental models, where old but outdated mental models will have to be replaced by more useful ways of thinking about the world.  The most important aspect of "actively open minded thinking", is the separation of our knowledge and beliefs from our identity, such that we can seek inputs that challenge existing ways of thinking.  When our identity is about being eager to learn and update our understanding, we will be able to consider contradictory information as an opportunity to improve our mental models.  By admitting first that we may be wrong even though we want to be right, we won't discount evidence that our thinking is wrong and will avoid confirmation biases.

After developing richer mental models, we should also adopt more relaxed expansive frames of mind to reach the top tier of having states of mind for insight.  In terms of our 4th power of attention, this would mean setting aside time for exploratory and regenerative modes of attention.  In general, we have to cut off the environment and defocus or focus inwardly to allow our brains to sometimes spontaneously generate creative or inspired connections in order to achieve the ultimate goal of synthesis.  This may happen while we are in bed, bathing, on the bus, or walking in nature.  This defocusing should happen after we have focused and struggled with our problem for some time, in order for there to be greater likelihood of solutions springing up in our minds when we defocus.  The OODA loop (Observe, Orient, Decide, Act) of learning and Lean Startup loop for developing strategies for startup companies, are stated as ways to make informed decisions in an uncertain world, where as decision makers, we may not be fully logical nor have all the information we want.  Hence, we should make small decisions first that can yield information to improve subsequent and potentially larger decisions.  The outcomes of the small decisions must be observable, such that we can learn from them.  It would be ideal to achieve iterative decision making, where each decision builds on lessons learnt from previous ones.  When change comes fast, delays in decisions become potentially costly, and swift action becomes more valuable.

Essentially, decisions are bets on the future because we have to deal with ambiguity and uncertainty.  The 3rd power of filtering will have to be undertaken with the Bayesian approach of thinking in probabilities based on how new information may adjust our mental models and assessments.  A careful evaluation of probabilities will allow us to decide more wisely.  To debias our thinking and reduce overconfidence, we should always ask ourselves "What are the reasons that my judgement may be wrong".  This is the reason why I think we should not separate our 4th power of attention into its respective modes of attention.  We have to sequence our modes of attention into micro-processes, such that we can perform scan, seek, scan, assimilate more iteratively for better results, even though it entails greater mental switching cost.

The perceiving of the entirety through synthesis takes into account everything that's relevant, including the role of people and the broader context of our planet.  Hence, it is about creating a better future for ourselves and humanity, where we have better balance, mental health, happiness and longevity.  Synthesis integrates the 5 powers.  Understanding our Purpose starts our engagement with information, and relates to and informs our development and application of the powers of framing, filtering, attention and synthesis.  Framing provides the reference points for filtering and sets the foundations for synthesis.  The Filtering of what's relevant to us is one of the frames for our Attention.  Conscious allocation of our Attention allows us to avoid distractions and allows us to self-determine our lives.  Synthesis is the epitome of our self-determination, where we generate true value in our understandings, insights and better decisions.  These 5 powers will help us better integrate into a world where we can better utilise the advancing capabilities of machines in work and life.
