#self-improvement 
#self-discovery 
#Singapore 
#learning 
#programming 
#frameworks 
#framing 
#reframing
#2023-01

## Learning About Framing - Reframing

Chapter 6 of the book “Framers: Human Advantage in an Age of Technology and Turmoil” is "reframing: occasionally we need to switch frames or invent new ones".  

We normally stay within a causal frame and just adjust the constraints because it is more mentally efficient when we can just rely on the previous template.  Adhering to an existing polished mental model also often leads to success and is a feature of human cognition, not a flaw or consequence of cognitive inertia.  Reframing is not just about adjusting constraints, because the mutability of constraints is limited by the frame we use, and more radical options are excluded.  Only when we resist an existing frame, can we get the mental freedom to generate new but yet suitable constraints, and uncover new imaginative openings.  Reframing is more difficult than working within a frame, but both are deliberate processes.  Reframing or the switching of frames is more about a stroke of insight than the methodical process of reasoning within a frame, so it cannot be improved by doing it frequently.  

There are 3 general ways to reframe: repertoire where we choose a different frame that has a superior fit from the variety we already have, repurposing where we apply a frame that exists from another context, and reinvention where a new frame is invented.  These strategies are not delineated perfectly and are meant for us to appreciate the multiple ways of reframing.  The repertoire strategy implies a need to remember a varied stock of mental models, so that less cognitive energy is used to identify the right frame when needed.  Repurposing or adjusting an existing frame from other domains to fit our current circumstances is done when we need to reframe, but have no ready alternative in our stock of mental models.  This requires substantial cognitive work to shape the selected frame appropriately, but it's something to play with to get us started.  Due to the fact that data cannot exist by itself and must exist in a mental model, the strategies of repertoire and repurposing amount to standing on the shoulders of others because the mental model we switch to already exist in some form.  When this is not possible, the act of reinvention has to happen to go beyond what one knows and devise a completely new frame or mental model.  This is the most difficult strategy.  

When I coded in Google Apps Script in 2022, I operated within the framework provided by the language.  However, I encountered an uncertainty in interactions between two concurrently occurring events: onEdit and onChange.  Due to the fact that the Apps Script language provided different properties for these 2 events, and I had to use properties from both events, I had to do the programming to ensure that the responses from the properties of both events do not conflict with each other, which appeared to have happened.  Hence, I had to stepped out of the existing frame and conjure another algorithm based on another frame from the repertoire in my memory based on process sequencing, which worked by creating a delay in processing between the 2 events.  However, the overall program became much slower due to the delay.  

Reframing is a very risky endeavour, regardless of the strategy used.  There is no guarantee of success because after a new frame is conceived, it may fail.  The process of reframing has no reliable signposts in its path, no straightforward cognitive processes, and no dependable schedules.  We may make fundamental discoveries that leads to reframing, but fail to complete the development of a new frame, or after developing a new frame fail to grasp its implications.  New frames are usually revolutionary and obvious on hindsight, but they are hard to grasp initially or incomprehensible in the moment, so they often take time to catch on.  Sometimes, the new frame is so much better that it renders the older frames obsolete.  At other times, new frames simply coexist with the older frames.  For example, proprietary software currently coexists with open source software.  In all cases, reframing an issue or problem allows us to see it from a new perspective, thereby revealing new imagined alternatives which might not have been obvious previously, which leads to better decisions and outcomes.  

Successful reframers are not all clever minded, quick to remember, or have deep experience, but they are all willing to risk new thoughts and forge new cognitive paths.  They are comfortable with the unfamiliar, and can gently let go of preconceptions and presumptions to see and seize new possibilities.  When reframers are able to see new possibilities, they are usually in an aha or intuitive moment, which may be so significant that they become emotional over it.  Reframing is however not routine and previous success does not imply that one can repeatedly reuse the new frame successfully, or repeat the reframing success into the future.  Successful reframers understand the shortcomings of relying on a single successful frame and actively seek out alternative frames that may contradict their own.  

There are 4 main difficulties to switching frames: the cognitive energy required to create a new frame, the requirement to step away from the familiar, the requirement to identify a frame that fits the circumstances, and the requirement to recognise the right moment to reframe.  The requirement for cognitive energy arises because we are not fluent in choosing mental models, in conjuring up or facing the unknown, and in unlearning or forgetting an existing well-used frame to free up cognitive space for something new.  There may also be a need to overcome cognitive dissonance in the individual's or the community's minds between the new frame and the old frame.  The requirement to fit a frame to the situation refers to the goal we aim to achieve.  The choice of a tightly or loosely fitting causal frame depends on the situation.  A narrow frame has clear and possibly easy to remember constraints, but may not work well when some conditions change.  A broad frame may remain useful longer, but require more thoughtful adjustments of constraints when imagining counterfactuals.  It also matters whether the constraints are mutable, because fewer mutable constraints in a well fitting frame means fewer useful options, which limits our choices and reduces our sense of agency.  A loosely fitting frame compensated by more mutable constraints may be better due to the additional choices it lets us generate, and the sense of empowerment and agency provided.  

I was fitted into an admin cum data entry job with fewer mutable constraints from 2015 to 2020.  Although I was contented to do additional research into solar energy and programming in my free time, the frame might have been a little too narrow for me.  The pay was also low.  Since 2020 until 2023, I've been employed in a research cum programming job with more mutable constraints.  Admittedly, the frame is still too wide at the moment, because I can only focus more on programming and self development tasks.  The theories of computation, artificial intelligence, logic and law are too broad for me to fully grasp.  In order for this change in career to happen, I had to reframe my mind from doing menial tasks, to doing programming and learning tasks.  Currently, I'm still in the process of learning and improving myself.  

The final difficulty of recognising the right moment to reframe is usually about recognising when no amount of adjusting of constraints to elicit new counterfactuals within the existing frame is enough to fit the changed circumstances.  This may happen due to a change in goals, where the new goals cannot be achieved within the existing frame.  Reframing must not happen sooner or much later than the change in circumstances.  This change can be assessed based on the alignment between context, goals, and qualities of the existing frame.  For some, it may be difficult to reframe because they are heavily invested into their current frame.  I faced this problem at the end of 2022, because I realised I may need to find a donee to do a LPA to safeguard my future.  I ended up signing up with a few online dating agencies and chatted with a few women to be my date and assess them as prospective wives.  However, the time spent on these activities and the loss of focus from my work made me reframe by adjusting my goals of looking for a donee, where I put less emphasis on finding a wife.  Reframing should be done infrequently, because each act of reframing is costly, as I've experienced personally.  It requires extra cognitive energy to abandon something one knows well, and to come up with something new and understand it sufficiently well for successful application.  As such, one cannot continually switch frames, because these directional changes can leave us disoriented.  

Essentially, there are 2 aspects of framing: use counterfactual reasoning to work within a frame if we want efficiency, and switch frames when we require a fundamental rethink.  In my case, I'm not ready to reframe my life to accommodate a wife with possibly differing goals, so I'm only adjusting my constraints to spend a little time each week to seek out solutions to my problem of finding a donee.  The choice of using counterfactual reasoning to work within a broader frame is less radical than reframing, and may be better even if it's less efficient due to the broadness of the frame.  Broad frames allow for more radical counterfactuals to be generated within the frame, which may be enough for the circumstances.  This could explain my Google Apps Script troubleshooting process, which could be reanalysed within a broader frame of algorithms than the narrower frame of extant Google Apps Script framework.  This would mean that my struggle to reframe the framework can be considered my attempt at radical counterfactual creation.  This in fact shows the importance of having multiple widening layers of frames to avoid having to reframe due to the higher possibility of mistakes when reframing.  

I'll end this post by replicating the book's example of Singapore's economy as an outcome of having very broad frames and extensive counterfactual reasoning.  Singapore's economy has been very successful over the decades since its independence in 1965, because it has a broad frame with many mutable constraints based on the few resources it has: geographic position, well-educated labour force, political stability, and a free market ethos.  Due to the choices provided by its broad frame, it was able to adapt to different realities over the years, from a leading port between Europe and Asia in the 1980s, to a manufacturing base for the electronics industry in the 1990s, to a hub for the finance, professional services and information economy jobs in the 2000s, and finally to a tourist and gambling destination in the 2010s.  

