#self-improvement
#learning 
#framing
#frameworks 
#causality
#2022-12 

## Learning About Framing - Causality

Chapter 3 of the book “Framers: Human Advantage in an Age of Technology and Turmoil” is "causality: we are causal-inference engines and often wrong, but this is good".  

Framing must be done based on causal understanding, which means that the resulting framework, mental model, or system can be understood by human reason, predicted with human foresight, and controlled by human hand.  The predictability of the principle of causation, or cause and effect, gives us confidence in how things work and what happens next.  Although we may perceive causal relationships when they do not exist, our perception of causality still allows us to consider possible relationships between actions and outcomes, and explanations for these relationships.  This offers us some comprehension of reality and some prediction of the consequences of our decisions, and is essential to framing.  

This causation is deeply embedded in all living things, because we all respond to stimuli, sometimes unconsciously.  We human beings extract causal connections from experiences too, mostly without much thought.  We are better off than most organisms that care less for causation, because our actions are based on a superior knowledge of how to leverage causal structures in our environment.  We are also better because we can imagine causality that is not obvious and immediate, beyond focusing on just directly observable causal links in immediate experiences.  We have acquired the ability to generate abstractions and turn our causal inferences into frames, which are mental models offering reusable templates to understand the world causally.  These templates are versatile, flexible and fungible, and can be applied new circumstances, where we can infer causal links that we have never observed before based on our causal templates.  With these adaptable structures, we do not have to start from scratch in deducing causes and making predictions.  With abstractions, besides adaptability and faster learning, we are also freed from being tied to the present, the concrete, the contextual, and the observable.  We can move beyond experimentation.  Without the ability to generalise to higher levels of abstraction, we would not have striving ambition and transcendence.  Life would become static without experimentation, evolution of knowledge, history and vision of the future.  

Our human brains are good at pattern recognition, especially visual ones, generalising from the specific by constructing a reality in our mind beyond what we can sense.  This use of our cognitive skills for abstract thinking and our social tendencies led to the evolution of human communication and the development of the grammatical language, which let us share ideas and metaphors.  Metaphors, which can be considered expressions of human frames that are causal relationships capturing a concrete situation and abstracted for application in other domains, are used to understand, remember, and communicate abstract explanations, which reflect an ability of our minds to connect abstract ideas with concrete scenarios.  Hence, thinking and communicating in metaphors improve our framing skills, and vice versa.  In addition, due to our need to collaborate effectively, we need to understand one another's intentions and expectations to work and learn together from each other.  These led to the development of language and social institutions from which abstract representations and relations central to our causal framing are drawn.  These also support the notion that human technology emerges from the accumulation of improvements across time through shared communications, where causal reasoning restricts our attention to the more promising experiments and makes research much more efficient.  

The greatest benefit of using abstract causal templates is that we are able to make the world explainable, even if the explanation may not be right.  For greater acceptance, it is usually not sufficient for a mental frame to improve decision making.  Causal explanations must be convincing for them to be widely accepted.  Persuasive explanations should not be too radical and should have adequate evidence.  In addition, the proposer of the mental frame should be well respected in society.  The explanability of causal frames not only allows us to generalise, it also helps us learn.  When we explain the world through causal frames, we are also learning more about the world we are explaining and generating deeper and more accurate insights.  Hence, when we learn through answering questions, we should explain our reasoning, not just give simple answers.  Since our earliest days, we human beings have created concepts of order, forms of gods and taxonomies of species.  Our efforts in categorising and reclassifying depends on our ability to abstract and generalise.  These abstractions provide general rules to guide our behaviours in different situations, and are the foundation of human agency, responsibility and control.  Agency provides us with choices and the capacity to act on them.  Agency depends on our ability to frame causally, through free will or in accordance with social structures, such that we can predict how our choices shape reality, based on the consequences of actions.  Our desire for causal understanding is directly connected to the consequences of our agency and actions.  Due to our agency and decision making, we are also assigned responsibility and can be blamed.  Due to our agency and responsibility, we can also exercise control beyond our individual selves and influence other people's decisions, or have influence or control imposed on us.  Social structures shape individual agency, but are also themselves shaped and influenced by individual agency through our mental frames.  Hence, mental frames are not just for understanding the world, but also ourselves.  

We may be wrong in the conclusions derived from our mental frames, because while we may have uncovered a cause through causal inference, the evidence we noticed may be just coincidental, or there may be other underlying mechanisms reponsible for what we see as causation.  Essentially, we simply may not know all that there is to know, or about how causes and effects are actually linked.  This continual need to adjust existing mental frames is an everlasting encouragement to improve our practice of framing, and is the basis of the scientific method.  There is never an end point to knowledge.  There have been objections to the idea of causality.  Some, such as David Hume, think that all knowledge derive from experiences, and while causal reasoning is human, we cannot prove it objectively.  Some, such as statisticians, think that events are correlated or coincidental, where correlation does not lead to causation, but they have nothing to say about causality.  Some, such as the ultra-emotionalists, rejects causal framing, deeming it difficult to ascertain and not needed, preferring to rely on intuitions and emotions to decide.  Some, such as the hyper-rationalists, abandon causal thinking because they consider machines to be better at identifying causation and taking action on the causal rules.  However, all these refutations do not diminish the role and importance of humans in doing causal framing.  There will always be cause, comprehension, and cohesion in the universe.  

To become better at thinking in causal templates, we should be aware of them and actively use them as we think through problems.  We should always reflect on the causes, assumptions, and truths behind these problems.  
