#self-improvement 
#learning 
#frameworks 
#framing 
#counterfactuals
#2023-01

## Learning About Framing - Counterfactuals

Chapter 4 of the book “Framers: Human Advantage in an Age of Technology and Turmoil” is "counterfactuals: envisioning worlds that do not exist lets us excel in this one".  

Counterfactual thinking is considered the second element of framing.  It is not about freewheeling fantasising, nor about intellectural clowning.  Counterfactuals are focused and goal oriented, not random stream of consciousness thoughts or free associations.  Counterfactuals are used to understand the world and prepare for action, based on the understanding of cause and effect embedded in our frames.  This helps us project forward or backward in time in our imagination, or take something happening in one context and imagine it happening in another.  Counterfactual thinking happens naturally, but can be quite a complex process, because it helps us imagine how events might happen in the world based on information we do not have, while concurrently making sense and use of information we do have.  It involves mental examinations of alternative realities in our imagination, and so is actually about serious cognitive work requiring a wide range of skills.  Imagining alternative realities allows us to make causal reasoning actionable, so we can test potential causes for their particular effects.  Hence, causal reasoning and counterfactual thinking reinforce each other.  Without causality, there would be no meaning to the multitude of counterfactual possibilities, while without counterfactuals, we would be causally deterministic and tied to the particular causes and effects without alternative choices.  

Counterfactual thinking is about the childlike pretend play, which helps hone our ability to imagine alternative realities.  Children can sense causality and counterfactuals very well.  Counterfactual thinking is also about story telling, which helps hone our reasoning and enables more vivid and imaginative thinking to evaluate options and prepare decisions, because stories are acted out in our minds.  This help improve our framing skills.  Theatre, movies, literature, paintings, sculptures, radio and television all allow us to experience alternate realities, except that they are fixed and don't allow to interact with them, unlike our imagination.  Computer games, because of their novel combinations of the familiar and new into many different possibilities, provide us with more compelling counterfactuals.  As we experience and manipulate alternative realities and evaluate the universe of mentally constructed counterfactuals while reading a book, thinking through a legal or business case in a case study, playing a computer game, or daydreaming, we are considering our options and possibly improving our judgements and framing.  

Counterfactuals have 5 benefits.  They keep us open minded and help us avoid causal determinism, where we jump to a particular causal conclusion too quickly, and groupthink due to a lack of diverse views and alternative thinking when evaluating a plan.  Counterfactuals also make us better causal thinkers, because they broaden rather than deepen our focus by reminding us of options.  The third benefit of counterfactuals is that we interact with them by experiencing them as observations of alternate realities, not as a contrived act of construction, so these imaginations are more useful to us.  Fourthly, in our imaginations, counterfactuals tap into and activate a lot of our implicit knowledge about how the world works, including causal insights that are hard to articulate, possibly beyond their obvious uses.  The final benefit is that counterfactuals provide us with a sense of purpose by exposing and expressing our ideas of action and agency as we imagine our way through the possible choices.  Having agency and choice in causal framing give us a sense of predictability and control to even grasp situations we've not encountered before, through the decisions we make, thereby shifting our focus from understanding to acting, and from comprehending to deciding.  

While counterfactuals make causal frames actionable, they are functional and their effectiveness depends on shaping them well through our goals in the context that they are used.  Our goals and the context provide the boundaries or constraints to limit the number of counterfactuals imagined.  These constraints should be tightened or relaxed wisely so that only the possibilities most relevant to the causal mental model is considered for guiding effective and productive decisions and actions.  These restraints can free rather than curtail creativity by providing a zone of permissibility to take mental risks and prevent a free for all.  