#self-improvement 
#learning 
#frameworks 
#framing 
#constraints
#2023-01

## Learning About Framing - Constraints

Chapter 5 of the book “Framers: Human Advantage in an Age of Technology and Turmoil” is "constraints: our vision needs to be bounded to be effective".  

While counterfactuals make causal frames actionable, they are functional and their effectiveness depends on shaping them well through our goals in the context that they are used.  Our goals and the context provide the boundaries or constraints to limit the number of counterfactuals imagined.  These constraints should be tightened or relaxed wisely so that only the possibilities most relevant to the causal mental model is considered for guiding effective and productive decisions and actions.  These restraints can free rather than curtail creativity by providing a zone of permissibility to take mental risks and prevent a free for all.  If we focus on the wrong constraints, we don't capture what's needed; if we choose too few constraints, we lose focus on what matters; while if we select too many, we may miss important details.  There are soft constraints that are malleable or amenable, which can be adjusted or bent, at times with much effort.  There are hard constraints that are fixed, impermeable, or inviolable, capturing the central tenets of mental models.  Neglecting hard constraints means giving up the actual mental models themselves.  An example of a hard constraint is the belief in God in Christianity.  When we choose constraints to limit counterfactual imagination, we must adhere to the most essential hard constraints.  Then, we add soft constraints and iterate through them as we explore / imagine the possibilities.  3 principles guide the wise and non scientific selection of soft constraints: mutability, minimal change, and consistency.  

Mutability means choosing / focusing on soft constraints that we believe can be changed.  Successful counterfactual imagination requires understanding or knowing which constraints are mutable.  Factors that transform the mutability of constraints are important, such as technological change, and may also be outcomes of framing, such as technology.  This implies deep recursion between outcomes of framing and the frames themselves.  We should modify constraints that reflect human behaviour or human choices, because they are more likely to result in useful imaginations.  Sometimes, we may be wrong in our beliefs in the mutability or immutability of individual constraints, but by focusing our reasoning on things we can influence or change, we can identify the most useful constraints, see choices and act on them.  Despite our sense of social freedom or mutability in human activity, we prefer counterfactually imagining behavioural changes that are constrained by widely accepted social norms.  While social norms are mutable and do evolve with time, we tend to see norms as fixed and unchanging, possibly due to our social inclinations to fit into society and not be ostracised.  

Minimal change recommends that soft constraints should be adjusted gently, aiming for the fewest changes, and not changed radically.  Our imaginings of alternative realities should be realistic and remain closer to the actual reality we are in, so that we reduce the risk of creating impractical possibilities.  This principle is similar to Occam's razor, which prefers simplicity and recommends choosing the less complicated explanation or solution to a problem when there are alternatives, because it will likely be more accurate than an intricate or elaborate answer with many parts.  It shaves away the unnecessaries to focus on the essentials.  This principle also results in us tending to omit rather than add elements to counterfactuals, because it is easier for us to imagine a world without some activities or parts of reality than to introduce features that do not yet exist or imagine the occurrence of activities.  There is less cognitive effort or mental work in omitting a mutable human action as compared to adding an action from countless possibilities.  There are more things to remember when we do something than if we do nothing.  Thus, we prefer frames that we can process efficiently than those that takes more energy and time, and so are more tiring for our brain.  This may not lead to the right course of action or solution, but there's less mental load and likely easier to achieve, because it's simpler to stop others from acting than to motivate them to act when they do not intend to act.  

The third principle consistency means that the modification of a soft constraint should not contradict another constraint in practice.  It looks at the relations among constraints.  This implies that all constraints should be in harmony with each other, and also means that the larger the number of constraints, the more difficult it is to achieve coherence and consistency in imagined alternative realities.  

While it may be tempting to perform a huge process of trial and error to test the counterfactual possibilities by dreaming up the tightening and loosening of constraints, and creating a multitude of alternative realities, applying constraints based on these 3 principles is not about creating a maximum number of counterfactuals.  It's about shrinking the search space and quickly identifying a manageable number of the most effective options.  There is a trade-off in constraint quantity, because fewer constraints for a frame generates more counterfactuals and many impractical ones have to be removed.  When there are more constraints, we are more focused, but the frame will generate less options and we run the risk of missing out on better choices.  

We sometimes build real physical models and simulations to support our mental models.  These externalisations allow us to mentally and physically practice, prepare, and probe possibilities with little consequence, especially when the model becomes too complex or when we want to make sure we abide by them.  When externalised into the design of a simulator, constraints are much less flexible, but improves our skills and decisions by focusing our attention on the limited number of inputs and potential responses that seem to matter most.  When externalised into physical models, there are more less modifiable constraints than a simulator based on software, so these represent inviolable, hard constraints.  These make it easier for us to focus on just the essential elements, but a model's value is also in the information that is ignored.  

Suitable constraints lead to viable options for decisions, which effectively shapes our choices, enabling us to achieve our goals and have an impact on the world, thereby changing reality for others.  Applying wise constraints on our frames will improve the lives of everyone.  Our frames give us the ability to understand through causal reasoning and act based on counterfactual imaginations and choice, but they also ensure that those actions actually matter by the grace of constraints.  Dreaming with constraints enable us to have a bias towards impact and effectiveness, where our achievements can be followed, and our frames can be adopted, adapted and applied by others.  This is less applicable for machine made decisions, because as of now, computers do not consider causality well, and cannot conjure or concoct counterfactuals and constraints because a far larger number of options still requires boundary conditions, which are choices that machines cannot make in the interest of time.  

Ultimately, as human beings, our counterfactual imaginations are most relevant only after testing by tightening or loosening constraints.  All mental models need constraints, which are not binary but on a gradient, controlled by the 3 principles of mutability, minimal change, and consistency.  We can also externalise the constraints by building physical models or creating software simulations.  There is understanding with the use of causation, agency with counterfactuals, and actionability of frames with constraints, but if our frames are too limited, reframing will have to be done.  
