#research
#Singapore
#mental-health
#technology
#education
#religion
#2022-07

## A View of the Current State of Affairs in Research from a Disabled Singaporean Researcher

This is not a story about my past, but I must start by saying that I am disabled due to an attempted suicide attempt back in 2011 due to an untreated schizoaffective disorder. I’m currently taking medications for life to keep my mental health conditions in check. I am a Chinese male born in 1976 and graduated in 2001 from NTU with a Bachelors with Honours in EEE. My mental illness only surfaced in 2006, when I could not find solutions to my unemployed situation while doing an online MBA. However, I had been beset with meritocratic anxiety throughout my younger days in school with a skin picking disorder and other trivial addictions (gaming, sports) and habits because I do not have a good memory and have a tendency to be optimistic.

My post graduation career until my suicide attempt was just a few years in total out of 10 possible working years from 2001 to 2011. I am forever grateful to two of my friends from PAP, one of whom was also my Professor from NTU, who employed me at People Worldwide Consulting PL from 2015 to 2020 as an admin assistant cum data entry. I had ample free time to do research into solar energy during that period and met with researchers from ERI@N on a few occasions to better understand the current research direction. I was not selected to join them in 2020, but I was eventually employed as a Research Assistant at SMU until today.

Given my exposure to research in Singapore, I have a concern about its growth and sustenance. Singaporeans from my generation in general have testable brightness, but that mostly stems from rote memory. The brighter ones can think well as I have encountered them in my secondary school Dunman High, but I have not kept in touch with them and hence, do not know how they have become. The people I’ve encountered in my life are generally practical and law abiding people. Being Chinese, most of the people I know are either Christians, Buddhists-Taoists, or without religion. I myself was brought up as a Buddhist free thinker, becoming agnostic in University, and while recovering in hospital from my suicide attempt, I became Christian.

My past research into the field of solar energy was very appropriate for my religion because I was studying the works of God in the creation of light. It was a calling worthy of being a child of God. My current research into computational law became complicated when artificial intelligence was reviewed. Questions arised as to the intent of this man-made creation and whether this creation is conscious. There were also questions about how this fits into law and society. Eventually, it boils down to Christianity’s acceptance of technology at its root. Some of my fellow colleagues who are Christians have left my research team. Hence, I believe there may be a chasm between the religious and advanced technology research, which is Singapore’s focus.

There are many positions requiring people of sufficient intellect in Singapore outside of research. Hence, there is a shortage of talent. If we rely on foreign talent, only the mediocre ones will come to our country at normal wages. It is very expensive if they are good or experts in their fields, and if they are hired in important positions, their pay is even more inflated. In our current pandemic times with warring conflicts in the world causing increased inflation, paying a premium for foreign talent may be too costly. Setting a national direction in life long learning is important, but adult learners bring with them many complexities in life. Unless they are single, the demands on them will skyrocket as they work, learn and take care of their family. This is in addition to the complexities of their beliefs, especially if they have a religion.

Singapore is taking the easier route of training workers to use technology. These technological routines and decision making processes could be managed with rote learning. However, these technologies are costly and may not be sustainable unless efficiency is improved. This will mean fewer people are required at work. With more people freed to take up courses, more will end up in research unless they become underemployed. Because of this influx into research roles, more will have to be done to help align their beliefs to their research. In my current role, I’ve been given only 2 important R&D tasks since I joined, one of which I had to return back to my team leader because I could not complete it in the short time I was given. Most of my time was spent learning. Although there was little feedback from my team leader most of the time, I could bring some of the difficulties I face at work to online forums. The more complex social, religious and philosophical issues are resolved through the reading of relevant papers and chapters in e-books, all of which I reformatted and printed out to read because I prefer reading from scraps of papers that are light to handle and with small fonts to include more content. If national resources could be made available in these areas, especially in terms of teachers who can guide or discuss effectively in national online forums or in person, or be living examples and mentors, I believe Singapore will have a bright future in life long learning and research. I say these as someone who is not very bright.

